California, Harvey Weinstein, Donald Trump: Your Weekend Briefing - The New York Times
Here are the week’s top stories, and a look ahead.
1. Deadly wildfires continue to rage across California. At least 40 people have died in the fast-moving infernos, and more than 5,700 buildings have been destroyed.
Here are the stories of some of the victims, including a couple in their 70s who huddled in a swimming pool to escape: One made it, the other did not.
Before and after photos show the impact on California’s wine country. Cannabis farms have been ravaged as well.
____
2. Puerto Rico is also struggling. Three weeks after Hurricane Maria, many are so desperate for drinking water that there have been reports of people trying to draw from wells on Superfund sites. Delivery trucks at stores have prompted stampedes.
President Trump tried to reassure Puerto Ricans that federal help would not be withdrawn, after sowing fear and confusion by suggesting the island was somehow to blame for its predicament and that emergency workers wouldn’t stay there “forever.”
This Saturday, the five living former presidents will attend a concert benefiting hurricane relief through their new joint fund-raising effort, the One America Appeal.
____
3. President Trump, frustrated by the legislative stalls on his agenda, used his executive power to deliver a one-two punch to the Affordable Care Act.
Here’s what we know about Mr. Trump’s decisions to allow the sale of cheaper policies with fewer benefits and to scrap some subsidies, and how they put Congress in a tough spot. We counted a total of 12 ways he is scaling back Obamacare — but you can still sign up for coverage for 2018.
Another of Mr. Trump’s orders — the third iteration of his travel ban — is expected to go into effect on Wednesday, effectively blocking travel for most citizens from Iran, Libya, Somalia, Syria, Yemen, Chad, North Korea and Venezuela.
____
4. President Trump also disavowed another of President Barack Obama’s signature achievements, the Iran nuclear accord, and threatened to pull out entirely if Congress failed to address his concerns, like Iran’s ballistic missile launches. Above, worshipers leaving a prayer ceremony in Tehran.
And Nafta inched closer to demise, after the administration threatened withdrawal and a rocky fourth round of negotiations. Its collapse could affect manufacturing, agriculture and energy — and risk solidifying political opposition among farm state Republicans.
Meanwhile, Mr. Trump kept up his criticism of the news media. Dean Baquet, our executive editor, held a public discussion of the challenges of covering the administration with Peter Baker and Maggie Haberman, two White House correspondents, and our media columnist, Jim Rutenberg. Here are seven takeaways.
____
5. Harvey Weinstein’s stunningly rapid downfall: The police in New York and London are looking into allegations of sexual assault, his former company is in chaos and the accusations of sexual misconduct keep rolling in.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences  revoked his membership, a rare rebuke that cemented his transformation from one of history’s biggest Oscar players into a hall-of-fame pariah.
And ripples from the case are spreading. Twitter promised new rules against sexual trolling and hate speech after a related, daylong #WomenBoycottTwitter protest. And Amazon suspended a top executive, Roy Price, after he was accused of making unwanted sexual advances.
Here’s how writers from the right,  left and center reacted to the Weinstein case.
____
6. The death toll from twin bombing attacks in Somalia’s capital on Saturday has risen to more than 200, with emergency crews still pulling bodies from burned cars and demolished buildings.
Officials said the attack was one of the deadliest to hit the capital, Mogadishu, since an Islamist insurgency began in 2007. President Mohamed Abdullahi Farmaajo has declared three days of national mourning.
____
7. Our South Asia bureau chief spoke with dozens of Rohingya refugees who escaped from Myanmar into Bangladesh, and who described a military campaign of unimaginably brutal violence: summary executions, beheadings, gang rape. And more.
“They threw my baby into a fire — they just flung him,” said a young woman, her family’s sole survivor. Satellite images show hundreds of Rohingya villages have burned since late August.
Here are some of the aid agencies trying to help the Rohingya.
____
8. Tensions with North Korea have not eased.
American B-1 bombers flew over South Korea, and the North renewed its threat to launch ballistic missiles near Guam if the United States and South Korea begin 10 days of joint naval exercises on Monday, which it considers rehearsal for an invasion. Above, North Korean soldiers marched toward a South Korean soldier at the border-straddling village of Panmunjom.
The unrest didn’t seem to faze investors in Japan: The main stock index rose to its highest level in almost 21 years.
And in China, ahead of the Communist Party congress beginning on Wednesday, President Xi Jinping has been tightening his grip on the mechanisms of power, including the military.
____
9. Back in the United States, the N.F.L. continues to be tangled in a political briar patch over President Trump’s criticism of players’ kneeling protests. Trump voters are now much more likely to say they view the N.F.L. negatively.
Commissioner Roger Goodell backed away from his stance that the players had a right to express their opinions, though legal scholars say showing solidarity is a legal right.
For those who prefer that the sport not become a, shall we say, political football, here are our Week 6 picks and an interactive calculator that lets you explore every team’s path to the N.F.L. playoffs (which its makers say covers all “383 sexdecillion” different ways the season could end).
____
10. Many people are starting to turn a wary, and weary, eye on Silicon Valley after a string of unsavory revelations — like Russia using Facebook and Twitter to interfere in the 2016 U.S. presidential election. Worried states, some of whose voting systems still run on Windows 2000 or XP, are looking to upgrade ahead of 2020.
But the concerns are even broader.
“The technologies we were most excited about 10 years ago are now implicated in just about every catastrophe of the day,” writes our longtime technology columnist, Farhad Manjoo, who’s begun a series of columns about a group he calls the Frightful Five: Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Microsoft and Alphabet, Google’s parent company.
____
11. “Saturday Night Live,” which was criticized for not mentioning the allegations against Harvey Weinstein when they first emerged, addressed them this weekend with varying degrees of comfort and effectiveness.
On “Weekend Update,” the co-anchor Colin Jost, above, disputed the idea that Mr. Weinstein should check into a rehabilitation program. The “specialized facility” that Mr. Weinstein needs, Mr. Jost said, would have metal bars and no women: “a prison.”
____
12. Finally, for a lighter moment, take a look at the unexpected turns that emerge on our recipe site, NYT Cooking.
Lightning-rod recipes — especially those that experiment with regional, ethnic or traditional cuisines — can provoke fierce reactions.
Beans in Texas chili? Sugar in cornbread? Peas in guacamole? Even Jeb Bush and Barack Obama have weighed in.
Have a great week.
_____
Your Weekend Briefing is published Sundays at 6 a.m. Eastern.
And don’t miss Your Morning Briefing, weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern, and Your Evening Briefing, weeknights at 6 p.m. Eastern.
Want to look back? You can browse past Morning and Evening Briefings.
If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.
What did you like? What do you want to see here? Let us know at briefing@nytimes.com.