The Year in Sound: An Audio Time Capsule of 2017 - The New York Times
Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device: Via Apple Podcasts | Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher
A riot in Charlottesville, Va.; hurricanes in Houston and the Caribbean; shootings outside a music festival, in a church and on a baseball field. Big new jobs for Donald Trump and Neil Gorsuch; big jobs lost for Michael Flynn, James Comey, Bill O’Reilly and Harvey Weinstein. A health care bill stymied; a tax bill fast-tracked. Here’s what a breathtaking year sounded like, from start to finish.
Background reading:
• The year in pictures.
• The most-read New York Times stories of 2017.
• More from The New York Times’s Year in Review coverage.
We’re taking Monday off for Christmas. For the rest of next week, we’ll revisit our favorite episodes, adding what has happened since the stories first ran. We’ll be back with a new episode on Tuesday, Jan. 2.
Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.
If you don’t see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.
From your mobile device:
You can listen and subscribe to “The Daily” from any podcast player. If you’re reading this from an iPhone or other Apple mobile device, tap this link to listen in Apple Podcasts. If you’re on an Android device, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.
Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “The Daily” there. (Here’s the RSS feed.)
From a desktop or laptop:
Click the “play” button above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’re doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.
On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:
Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “settings,” then “flash briefing,” then “get more flash briefing content.” Look for “The New York Times” and select “enable skill.” Now you can say, “Alexa, what’s my flash briefing?” and you will hear that day’s episode of “The Daily.”
On Google Home:
You can say, “O.K., Google, play New York Times” to listen to that day’s episode of “The Daily.”