Hillary Clinton on Her Political Future: ‘I Am Done With Being a Candidate’ - The New York Times
WASHINGTON — Hillary Clinton, who grapples with her second failed presidential run in a new memoir to be published Tuesday, said on Sunday that she does not plan on running again for public office.
“I am done with being a candidate,” she said in an interview on CBS’s “Sunday Morning.”
Mrs. Clinton said that she would still like a place in American life.
“I am not done with politics because I literally believe that our country’s future is at stake,” she said, referring to President Trump and her plans to try to hold him accountable.
Mrs. Clinton has not been shy about condemning her former opponent, using her Twitter account to swipe at what she believes are the most egregious actions the Trump administration has taken.
“We have a reality show that leads to the election of a president,” she said of the campaign. “He ends up in the Oval Office. He says, ‘Boy, it’s so much harder than I thought it would be. This is really tough. I had no idea.’ Well, yeah, because it’s not a show. It’s real.”
The interview kicked off a promotional tour to mark the release of her memoir “What Happened,” Mrs. Clinton’s account of her presidential campaign, the anguish of her loss and her recuperation. She is scheduled to make 15 stops across the country to discuss the book.
After losing to Mr. Trump, Mrs. Clinton cleaned her closets in a “frenzy,” she said in the interview. She consumed plenty of white wine. She even changed her breathing habits to calm herself.
“Alternate nostril breathing, which I highly recommend,” Mrs. Clinton said.
In the book, Mrs. Clinton catalogs the names of people she believes helped doom her campaign, including James B. Comey, the former F.B.I. director who said he would not recommend charges for her use of a private email server but accused her of recklessness.
Yet she said in the interview Sunday that she regretted skirting the State Department rules on the use of private email for government business.
“Oh, I think the most important of the mistakes I made was using personal email,” she said.
Mrs. Clinton also recounted election night and how her eventual loss sank in.
“I just kinda went in the bedroom, laid down on the bed, just thought: “O.K., I just have to wait this out,’” she said. “But then, midnight, I decided, ‘Well, you know, looks like it’s not gonna work.’”
She called Mr. Trump to congratulate him, then phoned the White House, full of dismayed fellow Democrats working for President Barack Obama.
“I felt like I had let everybody down,” she said. “I had not drafted a concession speech. I’d been working on a victory speech.”