Trump Decides American Envoy Headed to Australia Will Go to Seoul Instead - The New York Times
The Trump administration has abruptly decided that Washington’s pick for ambassador to Australia should instead become envoy to South Korea, filling a diplomatic void just as President Trump prepares to meet Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s leader, officials said on Wednesday.
The shift involving Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., commander of the United States forces in the Pacific, is a diplomatic blow to Australia, a close American ally. Australia’s foreign minister, Julie Bishop, confirmed that Mr. Harris would not be taking the post in Australia.
“While we would have welcomed Admiral Harris here as ambassador to Australia, we understand that there are significant challenges for the United States on the Korean Peninsula,” Ms. Bishop said.
The Trump administration’s decision to nominate Mr. Harris for the posting in Seoul was confirmed by a recent member of the staff of the Pacific Command who discussed the matter on condition of anonymity.
In his post as head of the Pacific Command, he oversees about 375,000 military and civilian personnel, conducting operations in a region that spans more than 100 million square miles, or more than half of the earth’s surface.
Admiral Harris has previously made clear he believes that the biggest threat to the Asia-Pacific region is North Korea.
[Learn more: Who is Harry Harris, Trump’s pick for ambassador to South Korea.]
“Our most volatile and dangerous threat is North Korea, with its quest for nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them intercontinentally,” he said during a 2014 Senate confirmation hearing for his admiral’s post.
“Our collective efforts amid the challenges,” he said, “underscore the importance of America remaining strong and engaged in the region.” He continued, “American leadership does matter.”
Mr. Trump is planning to meet with Mr. Kim in May or June. The date and location for the meeting have not yet been set.
Australia is a close military ally of the United States, and a bulwark against China’s growing military strength in the Asia-Pacific region. President Trump nominated Mr. Harris in February to become Australia’s next ambassador.
The United States had not had an ambassador in Australia since John Berry left the post in September 2016.