Opinion | The Self-Destruction of American Democracy - The New York Times
President Trump has single-handedly done more to undermine the basic tenets of American democracy than any foreign agent or foreign propaganda campaign could.
“Trump is a political weapon of mass self-destruction for American democracy — for its norms, for its morality, for sheer human decency,” Henry Aaron, a senior fellow at Brookings, wrote by email:
For the moment, let’s put aside the conclusion of “Assessing Russian Activities and Intentions in Recent US Elections,” the F.B.I., C.I.A. and N.S.A. joint report that was released in January, which said that:
This determination, disputed by Trump and others, pales in comparison to the ruinous record of Trump’s 10 months in office.
First and foremost, Trump has gravely damaged the premises and procedures that undergird American democracy.
Partisan polarization, which helped give rise to Trump in the first place, is getting worse as discord intensifies with every slur and insult Trump hurls.
On Oct. 5, the Pew Research Center reported that partisan conflict on fundamental political values
In the introduction to their forthcoming book, “How Democracies Die,” Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, political scientists at Harvard, write:
Their attempt at reassurance is not comforting:
In an email, Levitsky argued that “it is important that we understand that the U.S. has largely been doing these things to itself,” before adding, “obviously we should investigate Russian meddling to the fullest, but to blame Putin for the mess we are in today would be ridiculous. We Americans created this mess.”
Along similar lines, Ryan Enos, who is also a political scientist at Harvard, suggested that the question of Russian involvement in the election is a secondary issue:
In addition, Enos noted,
Trump has not only taken a hammer to the code of behavior underpinning democracy at home, he has simultaneously diminished the international stature of the United States — and arguably accelerated the rise of this country’s major competitor, China.
Daron Acemoglu, an economist at M.I.T. and a co-author of “Why Nations Fail,” argued in an email that he believes
Trump’s chaotic approach to foreign affairs has, in turn, served to strengthen both Russia and China, in the view of several experts.
Arthur Lupia, a political scientist at the University of Michigan, emailed:
The net result?
“We now have reduced leverage in many international settings.”
A Pew survey of adults in 37 foreign nations released in June provides the clearest evidence of Trump’s effect on America’s international stature. It found that
As the accompanying chart shows, confidence in Obama was higher than confidence in Trump in 35 countries. Tellingly, Trump did better than Obama in only two, Russia and Israel.
Critics of Trump’s foreign policy contend that the drive by Rex W. Tillerson, Trump’s Secretary of State, to “streamline” the department by forcing out as many as 2,000 State Department employees has had the effect of diminishing America’s international presence. By the end of this month, the number in the two top ranks — career ambassadors and career ministers — is scheduled to be cut in half, from 39 to 19.
In a Nov. 15 letter to Tillerson, Sen. John McCain, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, and Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, ranking Democrat on the Foreign Relations Subcommittee on State Department and USAID Management, wrote:
Their verdict:
Trump’s assault — and that of his appointees — on democratic standards and principles is the central element of what might be called a brutalizing or “decivilizational” process. That’s part of what underlies the eternal return of the president’s mendacity, reappearing this month in his behind-the-scenes recitation of lies about Obama’s birthplace and the Access Hollywood tape on which he can be heard bragging about what you can do to women “when you’re a star.”
These developments have revived open discussion of Trump’s mental health.
There are “signs that Trump is sometimes incapable of discerning real life from fiction,” David A. Graham wrote in The Atlantic on Nov. 27.
On Wednesday, Trump pushed the envelope even further, retweeting videos from an ultranationalist group in Britain “purportedly showing Muslims committing acts of violence.” Prime Minister Theresa May explicitly faulted Trump, saying “It is wrong for the president to have done this.” As The Times reported, “No modern American president has promoted inflammatory content of this sort from an extremist organization.”
Trump’s extraordinary record of prevarication calls the truth into question. As Hannah Arendt famously put it, when this happens, nothing can be believed anymore:
Or as Arendt told a French interviewer in 1974:
Add to Trump’s list of lies his race baiting, his attacks on a free press, his charges of “fake news,” his efforts to instigate new levels of voter suppression, his undermining of the legitimacy of the electoral process, his disregard for the independence of the judiciary, the hypocrisy of his personal posture on sexual harassment, the patent lack of concern for delivering results to voters who supported him, his contempt for and manipulation of his own loyalists, his “failure of character” — and you have a lethal corruption of democratic leadership.
On Nov. 15, Acemoglu wrote in Foreign Policy:
Acemoglu then asked, “Is it time to rejoice in the strength of American institutions?” Short answer: no.
In the face of these threats, Acemoglu continues, “the performance of U.S. checks and balances so far gives no comfort.”
The test facing our democracy now is whether the rules of engagement that make the system work can be restored. Trump trampled on those rules and won the presidency. That precedent may, in and of itself, have inflicted irreparable damage.
Is there a legal remedy? From the Mueller investigation, for example?
“Executive authoritarianism and lawlessness can be hemmed in and checked but not fully constrained by courts, the criminal law, or the written Constitution,” Jacob T. Levy wrote this week in “The Limits of Legalism,” published by the libertarian-leaning Niskanen Center:
At the moment, Trump’s co-partisans, House and Senate Republicans, have shown little willingness to confront him. The longer Trump stays in office, the greater the danger that he will inflict permanent damage on the institutions that must be essential tools in any serious attempt to confront him.